This week, as his party launched a new front called the All India Professionals' Congress, Shashi Tharoor plucked many familiar notes about politics being a "closed shop" for educated professionals, and why the taxpaying middle class needs to make its presence felt more.

In private chatter and public forums, this is an oft-heard lament from professionals, whatever their political bents — if only we, who know better, could enter the cesspool of politics, it would be rid of its dysfunctions like corruption, identity politics and so on.

"The middle-class professional is a very marginalised voice in governance," says Mira Sanyal, former India head of ABN Amro, who stood for Lok Sabha elections twice from south Mumbai — in 2009 as an independent candidate, and in 2014 on an Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) ticket. "As the nation becomes more middle-class, and reflects those aspirations and values, that voice needs to become louder," she says.

How middle class is not middle class

But first, let's examine the words "professional" and "middle class", and the notion that these interests are under-represented, or that their presence will cleanse politics.

Many of those who consider themselves "middle-class taxpayers" are technically the uppermost sliver of Indian society, points out Yogendra Yadav, political-scientist-turned-politician and founder of the party Swaraj India. Only 1.5% of the population pays income tax. "So this minority that calls itself the middle class, which already commands the bureaucracy, the Judiciary, the Army, the media and other institutions, is peeved that they don't dominate politics too," he says.

Their recoil from mass politics has a history. The class profile of Parliament and legislatures changed after the Mandal moment, as more regional parties and middle castes entered politics, says Sanjay Kumar, director of Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS). "This led to the middle-class perception that politics is dirty, that corruption has increased, though in fact there is no good measure to prove that it has increased since the '50s or '60s," he says.

Missing in action

And if professionals are missing from politics, they have their own reasons to shun it. Those from technical fields like engineers or doctors are not as inclined towards public work, though they may have opinions about these matters, points out Kumar. Those who work in the public sector, like teachers or civil servants are legally barred from politics unless they give up their jobs.

"Those who have families, and want to earn their livelihood without dipping their hands into the till, have to earn their money outside before entering politics," says Captain Gopinath, who has been an aviation entrepreneur, worked in the army, and in farming, and contested two Lok Sabha elections. "Politics can't be a half-time pursuit," he says. Some professions, like law, are perfect complements to a political career, but in most cases, it's one or the other.
The other reason, of course, is that the odds are stacked against any individual, however well-meaning, who doesn't have a ready network to tap. "The professionals in politics usually have a family infrastructure or can claim to be caste leaders," says Jayaprakash Narayan, founder of the Lok Satta party that started as a citizen reform movement, but whose electoral fortunes never took off. "We got 8-10% of the votes in Hyderabad, but only 1/2 to 1% in rural areas," says Narayan.

When professionals enter politics before a fuller understanding of how it works, disillusionment can set in. Their idealism, sense of their own merit — a "supercitizen" complex — and the failure to recognise other interest groups, can be a challenge. Narayan refers to the popular TV show House of Cards to talk about the amorality of politics. "You want to create change, but it's more likely that you end up being changed," says Gopinath.

The elite votebank

And yet, the middle class matters greatly to parties and electoral politics. "They have a crucial opinion-making role, they make a big noise, and can shape the discourse, even if their vote is fickle," says Kumar. They have a megaphone on the media and social media, and as India urbanises, these views ripple out further. 

In recent years, the decentralisation of fiscal power to cities has galvanised a new wave of civic activism, through resident welfare associations and citizen groups. So it does make sense for any big party to tap these energies.


The recent upsurge against corruption, the enthusiasm around the AAP and the BJP in 2014 owes much to this constituency, says Kumar. The Congress also needs to reach out to this long-alienated constituency, says Salman Anees Soz, north zonal head of the new Congress professionals' front. "There are many of us who voted for growth and development, and got gau raksha and repression. We need to reach out to this community, we need their ideas and their talent for policymaking," he says.


But for this educated elite to make a difference to politics, they have to think beyond themselves and their assumptions, says Yadav. "In India, this section has been hugely influential — it has led the national movement, the socialists, the JP movement, the anti-corruption upsurge, and so on. But this happens only when they understand the rest of country, build bridges with the poor, and become larger than their own interests," he says.


